Let us take another recursive algorithm and find its
time complexity
using recursion tree and back substitution method
Let us write the recurrence relation for this algorithm
First assume the algorithm
takes T(n) time
Next we have If condition, it will take one unit
time and then we have a print statement which also
takes one unit time Then the algorithm is call recursively
for n-1
So that will take T(n-1) time
Again the algorithm is called recursively for
n-1
So that will also take T(n-1)
time
So the total time T(n) equal to
2T(n-1) + 2 and 2 is
a constant here so as usual change it to one
So we will get T(n) equal to
2T(n-1) + 1
So with initial condition we have T(n) equal
to 1 when n=0 and T(n)
equal to
2T(n-1) + 1
When n > 0. so let us save this recurrence
relation with recursion tree method
First write T(n), What will T(n)
do, if n is greater than zero
It will print one time and call itself with
n-1 twice
So write
One, T(n-1) and  T(n-1)
here. Again T(n-1)
is a recursive call So it will take one
unit time and then call itself with n-2 twice
So the same happens with this T(n-1)
to similarly T(n-2) is recursive
call
So it will take one unit time and call itself
with n-3 twice
Same happens with the next three T(n-2)
This Recursive tree will thus grow till it reaches
T(0) and T(0) won't make any
other recursive call as n is equal to zero
So this is the recursion tree for the given
algorithm
Now that is marked the total time taken at each
level of the tree
First we have one, that is 2 raised to 0 recursive
calls next
We have
2 raised to one recursive calls
And next we have four
That is 2 raised to 2 recursive calls and
next we have eight
That is 2 raised to 3 recursive calls
Thus at k level we will have to raise two
a recursive calls now that has calculate the total time
complexity that is T(n) equal to
2 raised to 0 plus 2 raised to one plus 2 raised to 2
Plus etcetera up to 2 raised to K and
we have already discussed that the sum of all powers
of two till 2 raised to K is
2 raised to (k+1) - 1 and we can apply
that here
So we will get T(n) equal to
2 raised to (k+1) - 1 and at some point
n-k will become 0. That is K equal
to n
So replace K with n. So we will get T(n)
equal to 2 raised to (n+1) - 1
which is a asymptotically same as O(2^n)
now let us solve it using the
back substitution method
Here the recurrence relation is T(n) equal to
2T(n-1) + 1 so what will be
T(n-1)
It will be 2T(n-2) + 1
So in this equation instead of T(n-1)
write 2T(n-2) + 1
So we will get 2 raised to 2*T(n-2) + 2 +1
And now what will be a T(n-2)
It will be 2T(n-3) + 1
So we will get T(n) equal to
2^2[2T(n-3)+1] + 2 + 1
that is
2^3 T(n-3) + 2^2 + 2 +1
Similarly if we back substitute for K times we will
get T(n) equal to
2^kT(n-k) + 2^(k-1) + 2^(k-2) +...+ 2^2 + 2 + 1
as we discussed previously at some
point (n-k) will become zero which means
k=n
So substitute n for k and we will get to
2^nT(n-n) + [2^(n-1) + 2^(n-2) + ... 2^2 + 2 + 1]
And we know some of all power of two till
2 raised to (n-1) will be
equal to
2^n - 1
that is 2^nT(0) + 2^n - 1
that is 2^n + 2^n - 1
that is 2^(n+1) - 1 that is O(2^n)
So that said we have found the time complexity of
this algorithm using back substitution method